PROJECTION_FIX_SUMMARY.md, before:

# Fix: Projection Calculation for Future Months

## Problem
When viewing future months (e.g., January 2026), the projection showed R$ 0,00 despite having pending transactions. The issue was in the `calculateProjectedBalance` function's logic for determining the reference date.

## Root Cause
The original logic used the current day within the viewed month as reference, which caused issues for future months:
- When viewing January 2026 from December 2025, it would set reference to January 20, 2026
- This made transactions on January 25, 2026 appear as "future" but with incorrect baseline

## Solution
Updated the reference date logic in `calculateProjectedBalance`:

```typescript
// Para mês atual: usar data real de hoje
// Para mês futuro: usar início do mês visualizado como referência  
// Para mês passado: usar data atual daquele mês (se existir) ou início do mês
let today: Date;

if (isViewingCurrentMonth) {
    today = now;
} else if (safeCurrentDate > now) {
    // Mês futuro: usar início do mês visualizado
    today = new Date(safeCurrentDate.getFullYear(), safeCurrentDate.getMonth(), 1);
} else {
    // Mês passado: usar data atual daquele mês
    today = new Date(safeCurrentDate.getFullYear(), safeCurrentDate.getMonth(), now.getDate());
}
```

## Impact
- ✅ Future months now correctly show projections based on pending transactions
- ✅ Current month behavior unchanged (uses real current date)
- ✅ Past months behavior improved (more logical reference date)
- ✅ All existing tests continue to pass
- ✅ Build successful with 0 TypeScript errors

## Files Modified
- `src/core/engines/financialLogic.ts` - Updated `calculateProjectedBalance` function

## Testing
- Verified with debug script that January 2026 transactions are now properly included
- Build completed successfully
- No TypeScript errors introduced

Commit message:

fix: separate realized vs pending transactions in dashboard
- Fixed monthly totals calculation to distinguish between realized and pending transactions
- Transactions in future months now correctly appear as 'Pendente' instead of 'Pago'
- Updated projection reference date logic for future months
- Resolves issue where future transactions were incorrectly counted as paid
- Projection now shows correct values for future months with pending transactions
- All tests passing, build successful

PROJECTION_FIX_SUMMARY.md, after:

# Fix: Projection and Monthly Totals Calculation for Future Months

## Problem
1. **Projection showing R$ 0,00**: When viewing future months (e.g., January 2026), the projection showed R$ 0,00 despite having pending transactions
2. **Future transactions counted as "paid"**: Transactions in future months were incorrectly appearing as "Pago" (paid) instead of "Pendente" (pending)

## Root Causes
1. **Projection reference date**: The `calculateProjectedBalance` function was using incorrect reference dates for future months
2. **Monthly totals logic**: The `monthlyIncome` and `monthlyExpense` calculations included ALL transactions from the month, regardless of whether they had occurred yet

## Solutions

### 1. Fixed Projection Reference Date
Updated `calculateProjectedBalance` in `src/core/engines/financialLogic.ts`:
- For future months: Use real current date as reference (not beginning of viewed month)
- This ensures only truly future transactions are counted as pending

### 2. Fixed Monthly Totals Calculation  
Updated `useOptimizedFinancialDashboard` in `src/features/dashboard/useOptimizedFinancialDashboard.ts`:
- Added logic to separate "realized" vs "pending" transactions based on reference date
- **Recebido/Pago**: Only transactions that occurred up to the reference date
- **Pendente**: Only transactions after the reference date (handled by projection logic)

## Impact
- ✅ Future months now show correct projections based on pending transactions
- ✅ Transactions in future months correctly appear as "Pendente" instead of "Pago"
- ✅ Current month behavior unchanged (uses real current date)
- ✅ Past months behavior improved (more logical reference date)
- ✅ All existing tests continue to pass
- ✅ Build successful with 0 TypeScript errors

## Files Modified
- `src/core/engines/financialLogic.ts` - Updated `calculateProjectedBalance` function
- `src/features/dashboard/useOptimizedFinancialDashboard.ts` - Updated monthly totals calculation

## Testing
- Verified that January 2026 transactions are now properly categorized
- Future transactions appear as "Pendente" not "Pago"
- Projection calculation now works correctly for future months
